---
layout: default
---

# Session P73.4

## Some Important R-R Interval Based PAF Predictors
## D. Gamberger, T. Smuc

### Rudjer Boskovic Institute
### Zagreb, Croatia

Objective: The paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (PAF) prediction
challenge and the availability of its database stimulated a series of
machine learning experiments. The result is detection of some
promising PAF predictors.

Methods: In the research some descriptors that could be easily
generated by Physio Toolkit have been used. In the first group are
descriptors generated by `fft` function representing amplitudes of
the frequency spectrum for the input ECG signal. The other group are
descriptors extracted from available QRS files by `rdann` function
with information about R-R interval dynamics. In total 85 descriptors
have been constructed and used to build rules for PAF prediction, both
from records immediately and non-immediately preceding the episode of
PAF.

Summary of results: The important PAF predictors detected in the used
set of 85 descriptors are: a) R-R interval measured after some very
long R-R interval. Maximal duration of such interval less than 400
msec is a PAF predictor. b) R-R interval measured after two very short
intervals. If minimal duration of such interval is different from
absolutely the shortest measured interval for more than 650 msec it is
a PAF predictor. c) Maximal difference of two very near R-R intervals.
If this difference is more than 300 msec it is a sign that a PAF
episode might immediately follow. d) Peak amplitude value in the upper
half of the frequency spectrum. Very high peak value is a PAF
predictor. These and some other induced predictors can be combined
into rules which can help in PAF prediction. Preliminary result in the
screening problem is 31 out of 50.
