---
layout: default
---

# Session S42.6

## An Automatic ECG Processing Algorithm To Identify Patients Prone To Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation

## G. Schreier, P. Kastner, W. Marko

### Austrian Research Centers Seibersdorf
### Graz, Austria

An algorithm to identify patients prone to paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation (PAF) has been developed and evaluated using the records
of the PAF Prediction Challenge Database. The procedure is based on
conventional ECG signal pre-processing techniques, a correlation based
assessment of the P-wave variability, and a statistical decision
concept.

The algorithm comprises of the following major steps:

1. Heartbeat detection and classification is applied to subsequent 60
second ECG sections and consists of picking events with
super-threshold first derivative values and cross-correlating the
detected beats with a set of templates of variable size. Correlation
coefficients bellow 0.95 trigger a new beat class to be generated. The
beats with the most frequently occurring signal morphology are
considered to be the \'regular\' heartbeats.

2. The first derivative of the sequence of the beat coupling intervals
is checked for the occurrence of beats with more than 15% prematurity
and the same morphology as the preceding beat which are assumed to be
premature ventricular complexes of supraventricular origin.

3. A representative P-wave template is generated by coherent averaging
the respective signal part of all regular heartbeats. Thereafter, all
regular and premature heartbeats are compared to this P-wave
template.

4. The two groups of correlation coefficients corresponding to the
regular and the premature heart beats are considered to represent two
samples to which the U-test is applied in order to assess the
probability (p value) that both samples stem from the same
distribution. The logarithm of the p value serves as the PAF screening
parameter.

5. The decision on whether a particular signal is indicative of PAF is
based on a single threshold diagnosis model. A risk for PAF is assumed
for a particular patient if at least one of the signals exhibits a p
value below the cut-off threshold. The latter has been determined by
computing the receiver operating characteristic of this diagnosis
model for the learning record set and choosing the threshold which
gave the highest number of correctly classified patients (45 out of
50, sensitivity = 100%, specificity = 80%).

Using a cut-off threshold of -2.7, finally, the present method was
able to correctly classify 34 out of 50 patients from the test set.
This figure indicates the potential of the proposed approach and is
likely to improve after having fine-tuned the algorithm.
