---
layout: default
---

# Session S31.3

## Prediction of Spontaneous Termination of Atrial Fibrillation Using Time-Frequency Analysis of the Atrial Fibrillatory Wave

### F Castells, C Mora, R Ruiz, JJ Rieta, J Millet, C Sanchez, S Morell

### Universidad Polit√©cnica de Valencia
### Valencia, Spain

The prediction of the spontaneous termination of atrial fibrillation (AF) still
remains an open issue. Any improved information that could be extracted from
the surface ECG about the mechanisms of paroxysmal AF (PAF) and sustained AF
may provide important advances in the treatment of PAF in order to prevent its
perpetuation. In this event, the challenge is to discriminate PAF episodes from
sustained AF episodes. A database including a learning set with 20 recordings
and a test set with 30 recordings was provided. We hypothesized that the most
relevant information about the mechanisms that triggers the AF is contained in
the atrial fibrillatory wave (FW). Thus, a previous QRST cancellation stage was
necessary, which was implemented using principal component analysis (PCA)
concepts. The time- frequency analysis of the estimated FW was then carried out
using the Choi-Williams transform. This processing was firstly realized for the
recordings corresponding to the learning set. The analysis of the FW
corresponding to PAF patients revealed two different fashions in the time-
frequency domain: some patients showed a main frequency between 3.75Hz and
5.5Hz, which was very stable during the whole interval; in other patients it
was not possible to identify a main frequency, but the FW seemed to be
completely irregular and chaotic. On the other hand, the analysis of the FW
corresponding to sustained AF patients showed main frequencies between 5.5Hz
and 8Hz that evolved with slight frequency variations. These observations were
employed in the classification algorithm for the test set, obtaining 16
sustained and 14 self-terminating AF episodes, with an initial result of 26
correct classifications out of 30. The most relevant parameter to discriminate
among both groups was the main frequency. These results are coherent with
existing AF theories, since the refractory cycle tends to decrease with the
perpetuation of the arrhythmia. In addition, possible hypothesis for explaining
PAF behaviours could be based on excitations of local foci for the case of
stabilized frequencies and on the absence of reentrant self- perpetuating
wavefronts in the case of patients where a main frequency could not be
identified. 
