---
layout: default
---

# Session S41.4

## CiC Challenge 2002 Undertaken By Non-Stationary And Fractal Techniques
## J.C. Echeverra, M.S. Woolfson, J.A. Crowe, B.R. Hayes-Gill

### University of Nottingham
### Nottingham, UK

We have proposed an improvement to the detrended fluctuation analysis
(DFA) by using a recursive least squares method (the alpha-beta
filter) to quantify the scaling patterns of Heart Rate Variability
(HRV) data. This approach was used to address the second event of the
Computers in Cardiology challenge 2002. We have achieved a score of 88
points indicating that by analysing these scaling patterns it was
possible to classify correctly the majority (46/50) of the data set as
either real or synthetic.

Additionally, the challenge specified that each generator of the
synthetic HRV data was used to produce two sequences. Notwithstanding
the differences between both outputs, we have been able to identify 11
pairs of HRV sequences created by 11 different generators. Hence, the
scaling patterns of synthetic data exhibited by our technique seem to
reveal the intrinsic statistical properties of each HRV generator.

Moreover, the scaling patterns found for the real data sets promote
further familiarisation with the scaling behaviour presented by
subjects with no cardiac abnormalities. It is opportune to report here
that these scaling patterns reinforce the likelihood that a uniform
power-law behaviour for the long-term range, as has been suggested
before, is not always manifested.

Currently, we are investigating the use of empirical mode
decomposition, another non-stationary time-frequency method, that we
recently evaluated for HRV analysis, to assist in the proper
classification of the entire data set.
