---
layout: default
---

# Session S83.1
## Detection Of Obstructive Sleep Apnea Through Auditory Display Of Heart-Rate Variability
## M. Ballora, L. Glass, B. Pennycook
### McGill University
### Montreal, Qubec, Canada

Methods of music technology are used to create sonifications of heart
rate information. Data files representing QRS complex times as well as
statistics based on interbeat interval times (running mean and
standard deviation) are prepared and loaded into the software
synthesis program SuperCollider, where the values are mapped to sound
parameters such as pitch, tremolo rate, harmonic content, etc.

A flexible listening environment is created in which a cardiologist or
researcher may adjust the rate of playback and relative levels of
several parallel sonifications that represent different processing
operations. The listener may create an optimal audio mix via a
graphical user interface.

Many visually-based methods of analysis involve filtering the data, so
that by definition some aspects are illuminated at the expense of
others, which are decimated. However, earlier research has
demonstrated the suitability of the auditory system for following
multiple streams of information. With this in mind, sonification may
offer a means to display a potentially unlimited number of signal
processing operations simultaneously, allowing correlations among
various analytical techniques to be observed.

The sonification was used to enter the Worldwide Time Series / Signal
Processing Competition

Detecting and quantifying sleep apnea based on the ECG: A challenge
from PhysioNet and Computers in Cardiology 2000

CinC Challenge 2000 entry 20000503.000740, entrant 10

Score: 27/30 = 90.00%.
