---
layout: default
---


# Session S42.3

## Can Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation Be Predicted?

## P. Langley, D. di Bernardo, J. Allen, E. Bowers,
## F. Smith, S. Vecchietti, A. Murray

### Freeman Hospital
### Newcastle upon Tyne, UK

Atrial fibrillation is an ECG rhythm with a significant mortality due
to stroke. Its detection is essential so that suitable treatment can
be initiated. Although the detection of atrial fibrillation is not
easy in the general population, the detection of patients who are not
currently in fibrillation, but who are likely to develop this rhythm,
is particularly difficult. There is, however, some evidence that the
characteristics of some ECG rhythms are associated with the
development of atrial fibrillation.

The objective of this study was to detect those patients most likely
to develop atrial fibrillation from a data set made available through
PhysioNet, and also in those patients to detect the ECG rhythm strip
closest to the initiation of fibrillation. From the learning set of
one hundred series of RR intervals of 50 patients, 25 without atrial
fibrillation (normal) and 25 who subsequently developed atrial
fibrillation, an algorithm was developed to detect the presence of
atrial ectopic beats, separating them from ventricular ectopic beats
and noise. This was achieved by identifying short intervals with no or
small compensatory pauses. In the learning set, 37/50 abnormal and
34/50 normal patients were identified, giving a potential screening
accuracy of 71%. As a prediction test to detect the series closest to
atrial fibrillation, 19/25 were correctly identified using the highest
atrial counts closest to the onset of atrial fibrillation. When the
algorithm was assessed on the test data, a total of 29/50 were
correctly assigned to the normal and fibrillation groups (reference
20010430.191646 entrant 11), and a 39/50 score obtained in detecting
the series closest to the development of atrial fibrillation
(reference 20010430.194799 entrant 11).
