---
layout: default
---

# Session S41.3

## Multiscale Entropy To Distinguish Physiologic And Synthetic RR Time Series

## M. Costa, A.L. Goldberger, C.-K. Peng

### Harvard Medical School
### Boston, MA, USA

Cardiac interbeat (RR) time series under healthy conditions have a
complex temporal structure with multiscale correlations. In contrast,
synthetic time series are most likely the output of simpler dynamical
systems, and therefore, will be anticipated to have a less complex
temporal structure.

Entropy has been proposed as a quantitative measurement of time series
complexity. However, traditional measures, such as approximate
entropy, only quantify the degree of regularity on a single time
scale. We have proposed a new method to calculate multiscale entropy
from complex signals. Given a time series, we first construct
consecutive coarse-grained time series. Then, for each of these new
time series, we calculate an entropy measure plotted as a function of
the coarse-graining scale factor.

In order to distinguish between physiologic and synthetic time series,
we first applied the method to a learning set of RR time series
derived from healthy subjects. We empirically established selected
criteria characterizing the entropy dependence on scale factor for
these datasets. We then applied this algorithm to the CinC 2002 test
datasets. We found 20 of 50 time series that did not match the
criteria developed from the training set and these were classified as
synthetic. One limitation of our method is that it cannot distinguish
simulated 1/f noise from physiologic 1/f heart rate spectra. To
improve our result, we visually inspected power spectra of all time
series. Two additional time series were re-classified as synthetic
based on the fact that their power spectra showed pure 1/f scaling
without the expected peak at the respiratory frequency.

Using only the multiscale entropy method, we correctly classified 48
of 50 (96%) time series. In combination with Fourier spectral
analysis, we correctly classified all time series. In contrast, a
standard complexity measure (approximate entropy) did not provide good
separation.

In summary, a new multiscale entropy method has the capacity to
distinguish between time series generated by different mechanisms.
This technique may be applied to a wide variety of other physiologic
and physical time series.
