---
layout: default
---

# Session S41.5

## Simulate Heart Rate Variability In Different Physiological Conditions

## D.C. Lin

### Ryerson University
### Toronto, Canada

We modeled the multifractal heart rate variability (HRV) in health and
other physiological conditions, including autonomic blockades and
congestive heart failure, by using multiplicative random cascade. A
method is proposed to extract the cascade model parameters from
experimental data. The results provide the basis for simulating the
pathological conditions. Our main conclusion is that the approach from
multifractal to monofractal HRV, a property commonly seen in the
transition from cardiovascular health to heart disease, can be made by
turning off the small scale fluctuation. As a result, the generating
mechanism in the small scale becomes additive, rather than
multiplicative. In contrast, the multifractal HRV appears robust
against variation in the large scale. In particular, by turning off
the large scale fluctuation, multifractality is preserved, a situation
comparable to the condition of sympathetic blockade. We also showed
the similar effect by disrupting the structure of the branching
process. Based on the numerical simulation, we discuss the possible
“design principle” leading to multifractal HRV in healthy state.

# Session S41.6

## A Multifractal Inverse Problem Applied To Heart Rate Data Synthesis

## D.C. Lin, J. Thevaril

### Ryerson University
### Toronto, Canada

We used the so-called bounded cascade to generate artificial time
series which is able to mimic some of the known phenomenology of heart
rate variability (HRV) in healthy humans: (a) multifractal spectrum
including 1/f power law, (b) the transition from stretch-exponential
to gaussian probability density function in the inter-beat interval
(RRi) increment data and (c) the Poisson excursion law in small RRi
increment. The cascade consists of a discrete fragmentation process
and assigning random weights to the cascade components of the
fragmented time intervals. The artificial time series is finally
constructed by multiplying the cascade components in each level.

We also compared additive versus multiplicative mechanism in the
generation of the artificial data. We found that the probability laws
of the cascade components and the underlying fragmentation process are
more essential to the generation of HRV phenomenology than the
additive/multiplicative mechanisms involved in the cascade process.
After showing the numerical results, we will turn to experimental RRi
and discuss its mathematical structure as well as some of the
limitations of using cascade to simulate such a structure. Finally, we
present some preliminary results on using a hybrid additive and
multiplicative construct in generating the artificial HRV.
