---
layout: default
---

# Session S53.5
## Detecting OSAHS From Patterns Seen On Heart-Rate Tachograms
## P.K. Stein, P.P. Domitrovich

### Washington University School of Medicine
### St. Louis, MO, USA

Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the accuracy of
a simple, visual heart rate(HR) tachogram-based method for identifying
significant obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).

Method: N=35 HR tachograms were generated from beat-to-beat RR
interval data provided by PhysioNet, with each point plotted being the
instantaneous HR. Each page of the tachogram (landscape mode)
contained 1 hour of data in 6 parallel, sequential 10-min plots
(length 24 cm),plotted with customized software written in UNIX/C and
using gnuplot. The x-axis (time within segment, 0-10 mins) is drawn at
the mean heart rate for that segment. HR, plotted on the y-axis, was
on a scale of 0-100 beats in 5 cm for each 10-min segment. Each
tachogram was analyzed for the presence of cyclic variation of HR
(CVHR), i.e., visible, rapid increases and subsequent decreases in HR.
CVHR was considered to exist if there were \>=3 cycles of generally
regular (in amplitude, duration and frequency) cyclic heart rate
changes (of at least 6 bpm) or if there were \>=3 cycles of irregular
cyclic heart rate changes (of at least 6 bpm) during a period of \<=3
minutes. CVHR at a frequency of \>2/min or a duration of \<10 s was
excluded. Studies were scored either as “severe” if there were more
than 15 CVHR events in one hour and at least 100 minutes of CVHR
during the entire night, or “none” if they did not meet these
criteria.

Results: Of the 30 studies that were clearly identified as having
either severe OSAHS or none, 93.3% were correctly scored using this
simple method.

Conclusions: Results suggest that HR tachograms which can easily be
generated as a part of routine Holter scanning may identify patients
with previously undetected OSAHS, permitting two diagnostic tests for
the effort and cost of one. Also, although RR interval data were used
to generate tachograms in the current study, we plan to determine if
normal-to-normal interval data, which include only beat-to-beat
intervals under autonomic control, will provide improved accuracy.
